tree-sitter post (#1281)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2026-04-09-treesitter/index.md

---
title: A better R programming experience thanks to tree-sitter
author: 
- Maëlle Salmon
editor: 
- Etienne Bacher
- Steffi LaZerte
date: '2026-03-26'
slug: tree-sitter-overview
description: Modern tooling for parsing, searching, formatting, editing R code, just like for other programming languages.
tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes
  - best practice
params:
  doi: "10.59350/57mzc-7e212"
output: hugodown::md_document
rmd_hash: ac133b48e3251c48

---

> A little bit less than two years ago, building on work by Jim Hester and Kevin Ushey, Davis Vaughan completed a very impactful JSON file for the R community: an R grammar for the tree-sitter parsing generator. He even got a round of applause for it during a talk at the useR! 2024 conference! So, did he get cheered for... JSON? :sweat_smile:

Reviewer: Do you mean JavaScript?

Because this is the core file we work on (in addition to some C)
https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/next/grammar.js

Reviewer: (I know the output is grammar.json but that's actually not what I'd focus on! I see you also reference this below, so I'd consider tweaking that section too)

<span><span class='c'>#&gt;         &lt;NUM_CONST line1="1" col1="22" line2="1" col2="25" start="49" end="52"&gt;TRUE&lt;/NUM_CONST&gt;</span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt;       &lt;/expr&gt;</span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt;       &lt;OP-RIGHT-PAREN line1="1" col1="26" line2="1" col2="26" start="53" end="53"&gt;)&lt;/OP-RIGHT-PAREN&gt;</span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt;     &lt;/expr&gt;</span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt;   &lt;/expr&gt;</span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt; &lt;/exprlist&gt;</span></span>
<span></span></code></pre>

</div>

In both cases, you recognize words such as `LEFT_ASSIGN` or `SYMBOL_FUNCTION_CALL`. Parsing is an essential step before the code is actually executed, but parsed code can also be used for other purposes, such as analyzing code (does it call such and such [function](https://nrennie.rbind.io/blog/how-to-make-your-own-rstats-wrapped/)? and this without your own brittle regular expressions), navigating code (going from a function call to the definition of that function), modifying code (replacing all occurrences of a function with another one).

> Now, tree-sitter allows such code parsing but **faster** especially thanks to its support of incremental parsing -- which is key to update the syntax tree as you are typing in your editor for instance! Tree-sitter is agnostic in that it can parse any code as long as it gets the Rosetta stone for it. It's been used for many languages which means many tools have been built around it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, tree-sitter allows such code parsing but **faster** especially thanks to its support of incremental parsing -- which is key to update the syntax tree as you are typing in your editor for instance! Tree-sitter is agnostic in that it can parse any code as long as there is a grammar for it (think, Rosetta Stone plugins). It's been used for many languages which means many tools have been built around it.
```

It may be useful to be more precise up front, but still connect to rosetta stone as well

> To make tree-sitter "learn" a new language you need to give it JSON containing the definition of the syntax of that language, what's called a *grammar*. This is where the aforementioned JSON file by Davis Vaughan and collaborators comes into play! Treesitter.r, that provides a translation of the R grammar in the format expected by tree-sitter, is key to all tools presented in this post that use R code as their input. The grammar is provided as [data](https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/main/src/grammar.json) that can be used by other tools, not only R packages, even if the grammar is among other things shared as an R package called {treesitter.r}.

Reviewer: Yea the JavaScript file https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/next/grammar.js is actually what we provide tree-sitter! It spits out the grammar.json (along with nodes-types.json and parser.c) as output from running tree-sitter at the command line.

In particular, `parser.c` is the really important output file. It's what gets linked in to things like the R package for treesitter.r to actually parse R code using the tree-sitter system.

> To make tree-sitter "learn" a new language you need to give it JSON containing the definition of the syntax of that language, what's called a *grammar*. This is where the aforementioned JSON file by Davis Vaughan and collaborators comes into play! Treesitter.r, that provides a translation of the R grammar in the format expected by tree-sitter, is key to all tools presented in this post that use R code as their input. The grammar is provided as [data](https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/main/src/grammar.json) that can be used by other tools, not only R packages, even if the grammar is among other things shared as an R package called {treesitter.r}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make tree-sitter "learn" a new language you need to give it JSON containing the definition of the syntax of that language, what's called a *grammar*. This is where the aforementioned JSON file by Davis Vaughan and collaborators comes into play! tree-sitter-r, which provides a translation of the R grammar in the format expected by tree-sitter, is key to all tools presented in this post that use R code as their input. The grammar is provided as [data](https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/main/src/grammar.json) that can be used by other tools, not only R packages, even if the grammar is among other things shared as an R package called {treesitter.r}.
```

<span><span class='c'>#&gt;       <span style='color: #00BBBB;'>)</span></span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt;     <span style='color: #BB0000;'>)</span></span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt;   <span style='color: #00BB00;'>)</span></span></span>
<span><span class='c'>#&gt; <span style='color: #0000BB;'>)</span></span></span>
<span></span></code></pre>

</div>

Tree-sitter is the workhorse of many tools, that are mentioned in the diagram below. All of them are dependent on tree-sitter and the R grammar provided to it. Some of them are CLI, while others are R packages.

{{< figure src="tree-sitter.png" alt="Diagram of tree-sitter tooling for R. At the center is tree-sitter especially its Rust bindings and the R grammar for treesitter. At the top is the input, R scripts. At the bottom from treesitter is the treesitter R package,; ast-grep that is used by astgrepr which is used by flir and that is used by the CLAUDE.md instructions for parsing code; Air that is used by Jarl; Ark that is used by the Positron IDE; R code browsing on GitHub." >}}

Let's dive into these tools in more details!

## Browsing code interactively: Positron IDE, GitHub

> The real reason why the audience applauded Davis Vaughan is that he explained how the R grammar for tree-sitter had been [deployed to GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) so that we get almost as good browsing experience browsing R code on GitHub than browsing, say, JS code. If we search for a function name in a repository for instance, its definition will be indicated in the search results. See [Davis' slides](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gm0ikRBAfwc).

Reviewer: https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/10d2a09b-f175-4edc-9295-b4f3f15fdb4e

here is my video if you'd like to just embed it in the blog post itself, i think it would be high impact to do so

i think you can download it from github here, let me know if not and i can send it to you

Reviewer: Actually you can just download it from here 
https://github.com/DavisVaughan/2024-07-09_useR-2024/blob/main/shared/searching-for-vetiver-model-r-new.mov

> Also very useful is the use of tree-sitter by [Ark](https://github.com/posit-dev/ark), the R kernel [used in the Positron IDE](https://lionel-.github.io/slidedecks/2024-07-11-ark/#/language-server-protocol-1). Ark is how in Positron you get autocompletion, help on hover, etc. This use case of tree-sitter is also featured in [Davis' slides](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gm0ikRBAfwc). See also Lionel Henry's and Davis Vaughan's talk about Ark at [posit conf 2024](https://youtu.be/8uRcB34Hhsw?si=UeWqIi9PtEOWqRsp&t=2109), especially the part about [code assistance](https://youtu.be/8uRcB34Hhsw?si=GBqntC6tW7D2WhBN&t=2455).

Reviewer: I've also included an expand-selection video here
https://github.com/DavisVaughan/2024-07-09_useR-2024/blob/main/shared/expand-selection-2.mov
